For this video, we're going to make a
change to our high-low game. So open up
hilo.py, and that's the one that we
used in an earlier video. Now we can use
an else clause with our while loop, and
there's our while loop, to make the game
a bit more impressive. Now let's have a
look at what we're going to do.
Alright, so in the binary search slides, earlier,
we worked through what happens when we
try to guess the number 7. We were
guessing in the range of 1 to 10. So I
want to quickly review those earlier
slides. We start off by guessing the
mid-point between the low and high values.
Our first guess is 5. We're told to guess
higher - that means the answer must lie
somewhere between 6 and 10. The new
mid-point is 8, which becomes our
second guess. We're told to guess lower -
that means the answer must lie somewhere
between 6 and 7. Our third guess
will be 6. Where things get interesting,
is in the next slide. 7 is greater than
6, so we're told to guess higher.
The low value becomes equal to the high value.
When we went through this example
earlier, I said at this point, a human
would guess 7 right away. I also said
that the computer has to do the
calculation first, but that's not
completely true. Rather than use our
formula to calculate the new mid-point,
the computer could test to see if low
is equal to high.
If low does equal high, the computer
then doesn't have to ask us if the guess
is correct. When low and high are equal. it
must have been the correct number. Note
that this is only the case because all
numbers are present. In a normal binary
search, when what we're looking for may
not be present, this doesn't apply. We can
make our program a bit more impressive,
by not asking if the value is correct. We
know it must be, when low is equal to
high, and we can tell the player that
we've guessed their number. And the
changes to our code are quite simple. So
let's swing over and get started with
that. Alright, so on line 23, we break out of
the loop when the player confirms that
we've guessed the right number. In the
cases where we know we've got the right
number, we can cause the loop to
terminate and use an else clause to tell
the player what their number was. So
we're gonna start by changing the
condition for the while loop. Let's go up
and do that. So instead of while true,
we're gonna put while low is not equal
to high. So we continue looping, as long
as low doesn't equal high. When they are
equal, the loop will terminate, and if
that happens, and it won't happen for all
numbers - just some of them - but when that
happens, we know that we've found the
correct number. So let's add the code for
that. So there's going to be else down here
on line 29, else : line 30 print parentheses
double quotes, You thought of the number,
left and right curly braces double quote
dot format low in parentheses, and the
right parenthesis to end the line. Then on
the next line, print, I got it in, and left
and right curly braces again, guesses, double
quotes dot format guesses and two
right parentheses. Now just before I run
the program, I'm going to comment out up
here, the diagnostic information that
we're printing on line 9. So let's do that.
Alright, so let's now run the program.
So my number's going to be a hundred.
Press ENTER to start. So with my number being
a hundred, the first guess is obviously
too high, so we're going to put lower
lower,
lower, higher, higher, lower, lower, higher.
And as you can see, the last guess there is 99.
If we tell the computer to go higher, it
doesn't have to ask us if a hundred is
correct, because you can see it's already
guessed 101, and now it's guessing 99. So
if I press h here, which is correct
because it's higher than 99, You thought
of the number 100. I got it in 10 guesses.
So at that point, when I selected that,
low and high both equalled a hundred, and
the while loop terminated. It terminated
normally and the else clause was invoked,
and we got the output on the screen, as you can see.
So that's a bit more impressive. What
would be really good is if we could get
the computer to do that for any guess,
but we can't. It only knows it has the
correct answer when high and low converge
to the same value. With a high value
that's close to an exact power of two,
that happens about half the time. 1000 is
closer to 1024, and the
computer can tell it has the correct
answer for 489 numbers that we think of.
If you'd like to run this code in the
debugger, to help understand what's
happening, you'll find it a bit
frustrating. It can be annoying debugging
code that waits for input. Setting
breakpoints can help a bit, but there's
another technique you can use and I'll
show you what that is in the next video.